This second-round interview on September 3, 2026 will likely go beyond basic eligibility and test whether Tushar Maheshwari can convert business questions into accurate, maintainable BI solutions. The strongest strategy is to position him not as “a developer trying to enter BI,” but as a software and data professional who already builds databases, integrations, automation, and reporting solutions and now wants to apply those capabilities to business intelligence.

The preparation below is based on the requirements in Job_Description_R031400_Associate, Services Business Intelligence.pdf and the experience presented in Tushar_Maheshwari_1.pdf.

1. What the interviewer will probably evaluate

The role sits within Ciena’s Services Business Intelligence & Data Science team and covers reporting, analytics, business requirements, data models, report architecture, KPI visibility, stakeholder collaboration, issue resolution, and proof-of-concept work. The explicit technical requirements are Power BI and SQL, supported by business acumen and attention to data accuracy.

Expect assessment in five areas:

SQL and data modeling
Power BI, DAX, and dashboard design
Business requirements and KPI definition
Data quality and troubleshooting
Communication, ownership, and stakeholder management

Because Tushar Maheshwari’s strongest documented experience is full-stack development, databases, APIs, workflow automation, and data collection, the interviewer may specifically test whether his Power BI knowledge is genuinely hands-on. His resume lists Power BI, dashboard development, KPI reporting, data visualization, SQL, MySQL, Python, ETL concepts, and data modeling, but does not describe a named Power BI project.

Important interview rule

He should not claim production Power BI experience that he does not have.

Use this positioning:

“My professional background has primarily been in full-stack and data-backed application development. I have worked directly with SQL databases, APIs, data integration, data processing, requirements, and reporting workflows. My Power BI experience is more recent and project-based, so I will be transparent about that. However, the underlying capabilities required for BI, including data modeling, data validation, KPI interpretation, and translating requirements into technical solutions, are already central to my work.”

2. Best self-introduction
“Tell me about yourself”

“I am currently working as a full-stack developer at Telecom Network Solutions, where I build enterprise applications, database solutions, and REST APIs. A significant part of my work involves understanding business requirements, designing databases, integrating data, automating workflows, and ensuring that users can access accurate operational information.

“For example, I worked on an Employee Management System that automated employee records, attendance, and related processes. According to our internal assessment, it reduced manual effort by approximately 40%. I have also worked with MySQL, MongoDB, Python, APIs, and data processing.

“Over time, I realized that I am particularly interested in the data and decision-support side of technology. I enjoy converting raw operational data into structured information, defining useful metrics, and helping users understand performance. That is why I have been strengthening my SQL, Power BI, data-modeling, dashboard-development, and KPI-reporting capabilities.

“This position interests me because it combines technical development with business understanding. It would let me use my database and application-development background while growing further in reporting, analytics, and stakeholder-facing business intelligence.”

This aligns his professional database, API, workflow-automation, and cross-functional experience with the role’s requirement to develop reporting solutions, document requirements, maintain dashboards, and resolve reporting issues.

3. Resume and motivation questions
Q1. Why are you moving from full-stack development to business intelligence?

Strong answer:

“I do not view it as leaving technology. I see it as specializing in the part of technology that I most enjoy: using data to improve business decisions.

“In full-stack development, I have worked on databases, APIs, data integration, process automation, and requirements translation. While doing that work, I became more interested in questions such as: What is happening in the operation? Which metric best represents performance? Why is a process delayed? How can the information be presented clearly to decision-makers?

“Business intelligence allows me to combine my technical background with business problem-solving. My development experience is useful because I understand how data is created, stored, transformed, validated, and delivered to users.”

Q2. Why do you want to join this Services Business Intelligence role?

“This position matches both my existing experience and the direction in which I want to grow. I already have experience with SQL databases, APIs, automation, data processing, and translating requirements into solutions.

“What attracts me specifically is that the role covers the complete reporting lifecycle: understanding the business question, designing the data model, developing the dashboard, validating the metrics, and supporting stakeholders after delivery.

“I am also interested in the Services domain because it involves operational metrics where reporting must be timely and actionable. I would like to build solutions that help teams identify performance gaps, improve delivery, and make better decisions.”

The JD specifically covers reporting and analytics across the transactional lifecycle from sales opportunities through post-sales services.

Q3. Why should we hire you when your current title is Full-Stack Developer?

“My title is Full-Stack Developer, but several parts of my work are directly transferable to BI. I design and query databases, develop data integrations through APIs, translate business requirements into technical solutions, troubleshoot data flows, and build systems used for operational reporting.

“I also bring a software-engineering mindset. I think about scalability, maintainability, performance, version control, testing, and user experience. Those capabilities are helpful when developing BI solutions that must remain reliable as data volume and business requirements grow.

“I recognize that I am still developing the depth of someone who has worked exclusively in Power BI for several years. However, this is an associate role, and I bring a strong technical foundation, relevant professional experience, and the ability to learn quickly.”

Q4. Your resume says Power BI. How have you actually used it?

He must customize this answer based only on what he has genuinely built.

“I have used Power BI to connect to structured data, clean and transform it in Power Query, define relationships, create measures, and present KPIs through interactive visuals. I understand the importance of using a structured data model rather than treating the report as a collection of charts.

“My professional production experience has been stronger in SQL, databases, APIs, and application development. My Power BI experience is more project-based. I want to be completely transparent about that. At the same time, I understand the end-to-end reporting process and can explain how I would gather requirements, prepare data, model it, define measures, validate results, and design the user interface.”

Follow-up likely to come

“Which DAX measures have you written?”

Only mention measures he can explain. Safe examples include:

Total Employees =
DISTINCTCOUNT(Employee[EmployeeID])

Present Employees =
CALCULATE(
    DISTINCTCOUNT(Attendance[EmployeeID]),
    Attendance[Status] = "Present"
)

Attendance Rate =
DIVIDE([Present Employees], [Total Employees], 0)


He should explain that a measure responds to filter context, while a calculated column is calculated row by row and stored in the model.

4. Power BI questions
Q5. Walk me through how you would build a Power BI dashboard from scratch.

“I would follow a structured process:

Identify the intended users, decisions, KPIs, refresh expectations, and required level of detail.
Identify the source systems and determine data ownership.
Profile the data for missing values, duplicates, inconsistent keys, and date issues.
Use SQL or Power Query to clean and transform the data at the appropriate layer.
Design a star schema with fact and dimension tables.
Create relationships at the correct granularity.
Develop explicit DAX measures for the approved KPIs.
Design the report around user decisions, not around all available data.
Reconcile totals against source systems and validate edge cases.
Conduct user acceptance testing and document metric definitions.
Publish to the appropriate workspace and configure refresh and access.
Monitor usage, performance, refresh failures, and change requests.

“I would also maintain a requirements document and KPI dictionary so that users understand exactly what every metric means.”

Q6. What is a star schema, and why is it preferred in Power BI?

“A star schema contains a central fact table surrounded by dimension tables. The fact table stores measurable business events, such as service cases, orders, employee attendance records, or revenue transactions. Dimension tables contain descriptive attributes, such as date, customer, employee, geography, service type, or status.

“It is preferred because it produces simpler relationships, clearer filter flow, more reusable measures, and usually better performance than a single large flat table or a highly normalized transactional structure.

“The first thing I would establish is the grain of the fact table. For example, if the grain is one row per service case, I would not mix case-level records with multiple case-update records without handling the one-to-many relationship properly.”

Q7. What is the difference between a measure and a calculated column?

“A calculated column is evaluated row by row during data refresh and stored in the model. It is useful for classifications, flags, categories, and values needed for relationships or slicing.

“A measure is calculated at query time based on the current filter context. Measures are better for totals, rates, ratios, averages, year-to-date calculations, and other dynamic KPIs.

“I would generally prefer a measure for aggregated business metrics because it is dynamic and does not unnecessarily increase model size.”

Q8. What is filter context in DAX?

“Filter context is the set of filters applied when a measure is evaluated. These filters can come from slicers, rows and columns in a visual, page filters, report filters, or DAX functions such as CALCULATE.

“For example, a Total Revenue measure may return one value at the report level, but when Customer is placed in a table, the same measure is evaluated separately for each customer’s filter context.

“CALCULATE is important because it modifies filter context before evaluating an expression.”

Q9. Import mode versus DirectQuery?

“In Import mode, data is loaded into the Power BI model. It generally provides faster report performance and more modeling flexibility, but the data is only as current as the latest refresh.

“In DirectQuery, the report sends queries to the source when users interact with it. It can support fresher data and avoid importing all records, but its performance depends heavily on the source system, network, query design, and concurrency.

“I would choose based on data volume, freshness requirements, source performance, security, transformation needs, and expected usage. I would not select DirectQuery only because the data is large; I would first evaluate aggregation, incremental refresh, and model design.”

Q10. How would you improve a slow Power BI report?

“I would isolate whether the delay comes from the data source, refresh process, model, DAX, or visuals.

“I would check:

Whether the model follows a star schema
Whether unnecessary columns and high-cardinality fields have been removed
Whether relationships are correct and mostly single-direction
Whether DAX measures contain expensive iterators
Whether too many visuals are issuing queries simultaneously
Whether transformations can be pushed to the source through query folding
Whether source SQL is indexed and optimized
Whether incremental refresh or aggregations would help

“I would measure before and after each change rather than optimizing based on assumptions.”

Q11. What is Row-Level Security?

“Row-Level Security restricts which rows a user can view. For example, a regional manager may be permitted to see only customers or service activity in that manager’s region.

“Static RLS assigns users to predefined roles. Dynamic RLS commonly uses the signed-in user’s identity and a security mapping table to determine access.

“I would test RLS carefully because an incorrect relationship or mapping can either expose unauthorized information or prevent legitimate users from seeing their data.”

5. SQL questions
Q12. What is the difference between INNER JOIN and LEFT JOIN?

“INNER JOIN returns only records that match in both tables. LEFT JOIN returns all records from the left table and matching records from the right table. When no right-side match exists, the right-side columns contain NULL.

“For reporting, I would use LEFT JOIN when retaining all primary business records matters. For example, if I want all customers, including customers with no service requests, I would start with the customer table and left join the service-request table.”

Q13. Write a query to find the top five customers by revenue.
SELECT
    customer_id,
    SUM(revenue) AS total_revenue
FROM service_transactions
GROUP BY customer_id
ORDER BY total_revenue DESC
LIMIT 5;


Add verbally:

“If the database is SQL Server, I would use TOP 5 rather than LIMIT 5. I would also clarify whether refunded or cancelled transactions should be excluded and how ties should be handled.”

A tie-sensitive approach:

WITH customer_revenue AS (
    SELECT
        customer_id,
        SUM(revenue) AS total_revenue
    FROM service_transactions
    GROUP BY customer_id
),
ranked_customers AS (
    SELECT
        customer_id,
        total_revenue,
        DENSE_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY total_revenue DESC) AS revenue_rank
    FROM customer_revenue
)
SELECT customer_id, total_revenue
FROM ranked_customers
WHERE revenue_rank <= 5;

Q14. How would you find duplicate records?
SELECT
    employee_id,
    attendance_date,
    COUNT(*) AS record_count
FROM attendance
GROUP BY
    employee_id,
    attendance_date
HAVING COUNT(*) > 1;


“The correct duplicate definition depends on the business key. Two rows being visually similar does not necessarily make them duplicates. I would first establish whether uniqueness means employee and date, transaction ID, service case ID, or another combination.”

Q15. WHERE versus HAVING?

“WHERE filters rows before aggregation. HAVING filters aggregated groups after GROUP BY.

“For example, WHERE status = 'Completed' selects completed rows before totals are calculated. HAVING COUNT(*) > 10 selects only groups whose calculated count exceeds ten.”

Q16. CTE versus subquery?

“Both can express intermediate results. A CTE often makes a complex query easier to read, test, and maintain, especially when there are multiple transformation steps or window functions.

“A CTE does not automatically mean better performance. The execution plan and database engine determine that. I choose it primarily for clarity unless performance testing shows another structure is better.”

Q17. How would you calculate month-over-month performance?
WITH monthly_metrics AS (
    SELECT
        DATE_FORMAT(transaction_date, '%Y-%m-01') AS month_start,
        SUM(revenue) AS monthly_revenue
    FROM service_transactions
    GROUP BY DATE_FORMAT(transaction_date, '%Y-%m-01')
),
with_previous_month AS (
    SELECT
        month_start,
        monthly_revenue,
        LAG(monthly_revenue) OVER (ORDER BY month_start) AS previous_revenue
    FROM monthly_metrics
)
SELECT
    month_start,
    monthly_revenue,
    previous_revenue,
    ROUND(
        100.0 * (monthly_revenue - previous_revenue)
        / NULLIF(previous_revenue, 0),
        2
    ) AS month_over_month_pct
FROM with_previous_month;


“I used NULLIF to avoid division by zero. I would also use a proper calendar table in the BI model so missing months are represented.”

Q18. How do you optimize a slow SQL query?

“I first inspect the execution plan and identify whether the issue is caused by full scans, poor join strategy, large intermediate results, sorting, or missing indexes.

“I then check whether:

Predicates can filter data earlier
Join columns have compatible data types
Useful indexes exist on filters and joins
The query is selecting unnecessary columns
Functions on indexed columns are preventing index use
Aggregation can occur before a large join
Duplicate rows are being introduced by incorrect relationships

“I would test the result for correctness after optimization. A faster query that changes the business total is not an improvement.”

6. Data quality and troubleshooting questions
Q19. A stakeholder says the Power BI number is wrong. What do you do?

“I would not immediately assume that either the dashboard or stakeholder is wrong. I would first capture the exact metric, date range, filters, and expected result.

“Then I would trace the number through the full data lineage:

Check report and visual filters.
Review the DAX measure.
Validate relationships and granularity.
Inspect transformed data.
Compare the result with the source.
Confirm refresh time and source extract time.
Check whether the stakeholder uses a different business definition.

“Common causes include different date definitions, duplicate joins, excluded statuses, timezone conversion, delayed refresh, cancelled transactions, or confusion between distinct count and row count.

“Once resolved, I would document the definition or fix so the same issue does not recur.”

This answer directly addresses the role’s responsibility to interface with internal teams to resolve reporting and data-related issues.

Q20. How do you maintain data completeness and accuracy?

“I use validation at multiple levels:

Source-to-target row counts
Duplicate and uniqueness checks
Null checks on mandatory fields
Referential-integrity checks
Valid range and category checks
Reconciliation of KPI totals against trusted sources
Refresh monitoring
Exception reporting
User acceptance testing

“I also document the grain, business rules, exclusions, source, owner, and refresh frequency for critical metrics. Accuracy is not only a technical responsibility; stakeholders must agree on the definition.”

Q21. What if data from two systems disagrees?

“I would identify the system of record for the metric and understand the purpose and timing of each system. Differences can occur because of update frequency, status mapping, timezone, currency conversion, late-arriving records, or different business definitions.

“I would compare a small sample of records by business key, trace their lifecycle in both systems, and quantify the mismatch by category. I would then work with the appropriate data owners to agree on the rule.

“I would avoid silently choosing the number that looks more reasonable.”

7. Requirements and business-acumen questions
Q22. How do you gather reporting requirements?

“I begin with the decision the stakeholder is trying to make, rather than asking only which chart they want.

“My questions would include:

Who will use the report?
What decision or action should it support?
What are the approved KPI definitions?
At what level of detail should users investigate?
Which dimensions and filters are needed?
Who owns the source data?
How current must the information be?
What security restrictions apply?
How will acceptance be measured?

“I would summarize the requirements using a prototype or wireframe and ask stakeholders to validate metric definitions, layout, and acceptance criteria before extensive development begins.”

Q23. A stakeholder asks for “a dashboard showing service performance.” What questions do you ask?

“I would clarify what service performance means in that business context. It might refer to response time, resolution time, SLA compliance, backlog, customer satisfaction, utilization, repeat cases, revenue, or cost.

“I would ask:

Which service process is in scope?
What event starts and ends the SLA clock?
Are weekends and holidays excluded?
Which statuses count as open, closed, or cancelled?
Should performance be viewed by customer, region, service type, team, or priority?
What target defines good performance?
What action should be taken when a metric is below target?

“Only after agreeing on those definitions would I design the data model and dashboard.”

Q24. How do you distinguish a metric from a KPI?

“A metric is any measurable value, such as the number of open cases. A KPI is a metric connected to a business objective, target, and interpretation.

“For example, average resolution time becomes a KPI when the business establishes a target, defines the applicable cases, decides how it will be monitored, and determines what action follows when performance is outside the target.”

Q25. Which KPIs might matter to a Services organization?

“Depending on the service model, useful KPIs could include:

Service-request volume
Backlog
Average response time
Average resolution time
SLA compliance percentage
First-time resolution rate
Reopen rate
Customer satisfaction
Resource utilization
Services revenue and margin
Forecast versus actual delivery

“I would not assume every metric is required. I would select KPIs based on the team’s objectives and ensure that every metric has an agreed definition and owner.”

8. Scenario and case-study questions
Q26. Design a service-performance dashboard.

“I would first identify the primary audience. An executive may need trends and exceptions, while an operations manager may need case-level drill-down.

“I would propose:

Summary section

Total service cases
Open backlog
SLA compliance
Average response time
Average resolution time

Trend section

Case volume over time
SLA performance over time
Opened versus closed cases

Diagnostic section

Performance by priority
Performance by customer
Performance by region
Performance by service type
Aging buckets for open cases

Detail section

Drill-through to individual cases

“The model could include a service-case fact table and Date, Customer, Region, Service Type, Priority, Status, and Assigned Team dimensions. Before development, I would confirm grain, SLA definitions, reopened-case logic, and whether calendar or business hours are used.”

Q27. A manager wants ten new dashboards within two weeks. What do you do?

“I would clarify the intended outcomes and prioritize by business value, urgency, risk, and dependency. Ten requests may share data sources and KPIs, so I would identify reusable components.

“I would propose an incremental plan:

Agree on the highest-value dashboard.
Build a reusable data model and KPI layer.
Deliver an MVP for early feedback.
Schedule the remaining reports in ranked order.
Communicate scope and delivery risks transparently.

“I would not promise all ten without understanding complexity because that could compromise data accuracy. At the same time, I would look for ways to deliver useful information quickly.”

Q28. How would you evaluate a new BI tool in a proof of concept?

“I would begin with a defined business use case and measurable evaluation criteria.

“The criteria might include:

Connectivity to required sources
Transformation and modeling capability
Performance at expected data volumes
Security and governance
Visualization and self-service features
Deployment and refresh capabilities
Maintainability
Cost and licensing
User adoption

“I would build a limited prototype using representative data, compare it against the existing approach, document findings, and make a recommendation based on evidence rather than novelty.”

The JD explicitly includes participation in proof-of-concept initiatives for new tools and technologies.

9. Behavioral questions with safe STAR answers
Q29. Tell me about a project where you reduced manual work.

Use the Employee Management System, but be ready to explain how the 40% was determined.

Situation: “Employee records and attendance-related activities involved repetitive manual work.”

Task: “My responsibility was to build a system that centralized information and automated recurring activities.”

Action: “I helped design and develop an Employee Management System using the MERN stack. I worked on the database structure, APIs, validation, workflows, and coordination with users to understand requirements.”

Result: “The solution reduced the estimated manual effort by approximately 40% and made employee information easier to manage and retrieve. It also taught me that successful automation depends on understanding the process and data definitions, not only on writing code.”

The resume identifies this solution as a MERN-based workflow automation project and states a 40% reduction in manual effort.

Be ready for:

“How did you measure 40%?”

Only give a truthful method. If it was an estimate:

“It was an operational estimate based on comparing the manual steps and time required before and after automation, rather than a formal controlled study. If measuring it today, I would capture baseline processing time, transaction volume, error rate, and post-implementation processing time more formally.”

Q30. Tell me about translating a business requirement into a technical solution.

“In the Employee Management System, users needed a more structured way to manage employee records and recurring workflows.

“I broke the requirement into entities, user roles, business rules, API operations, and validation conditions. I then designed the database and backend services around those needs.

“During development, I clarified ambiguous requirements with stakeholders rather than making technical assumptions. This helped us build functionality that matched the actual process.

“That experience is relevant to BI because dashboard development also requires converting broad business questions into data definitions, models, measures, and user-friendly outputs.”

His resume specifically states that he worked with cross-functional teams to translate business requirements into technical solutions.

Q31. Tell me about a difficult data issue.

Use a real example. Recommended structure:

Situation: “Data received from multiple sources contained inconsistent values or incomplete records.”

Task: “I needed to prepare reliable data without losing valid information.”

Action: “I profiled the data, identified patterns in missing and inconsistent values, standardized formats, removed duplicates based on a defined key, and validated a sample against the source.”

Result: “The processed data became more consistent and usable for downstream work. The main lesson was to define validation rules before cleaning rather than modifying data based on appearance.”

His earlier experience included automated web data collection, extraction, cleaning, and processing using Python-based tools.

Q32. Tell me about a time you made a mistake.

“During development, I once interpreted a requirement too technically before validating the expected user workflow. The implementation worked as designed, but it did not fully match how users wanted to perform the task.

“I acknowledged the gap, discussed the workflow again with the stakeholder, revised the solution, and introduced an early-review step for subsequent features.

“Since then, I try to validate requirements with examples, acceptance criteria, and a simple prototype before completing the implementation.”

Use a genuine example if he has one. The important qualities are ownership, correction, and process improvement.

Q33. How do you work with global teams and different time zones?

“I rely on clear written communication, documented decisions, visible priorities, and well-defined ownership. I try to use overlapping hours for discussions requiring quick feedback and use asynchronous updates for routine progress.

“I would send agendas before meetings, record actions and decisions afterward, and raise blockers early. I also avoid assuming that silence means agreement, particularly when requirements or metric definitions are involved.”

The ability to work in a global organization across multiple time zones appears among the role’s preferred qualifications.

Q34. How do you prioritize your work?

“I prioritize based on business impact, urgency, dependency, risk, and effort. I first identify whether any task blocks another team, affects a critical metric, or has a committed deadline.

“For competing priorities, I communicate the trade-offs to the relevant stakeholders and agree on the order instead of silently delaying one request.

“I also break larger work into smaller deliverables so stakeholders can receive value and provide feedback earlier.”

10. Possible interviewer-style analytical questions

Given the interviewer’s apparent quantitative and data-science background, she may appreciate structured reasoning and validation more than memorized terminology.

Q35. How would you know whether a dashboard was successful?

“A dashboard is successful when it supports a real decision and is trusted and used by its intended audience.

“I would consider:

Accuracy and reconciliation
Adoption and recurring usage
Reduction in manual reporting effort
Time saved in obtaining information
Ability to detect exceptions earlier
Action taken from the insights
Stakeholder satisfaction
Performance and refresh reliability

“A visually attractive dashboard with low usage or disputed metrics is not successful.”

Q36. How do you prevent misleading visualizations?

“I use a chart appropriate for the question and avoid unnecessary complexity. I maintain consistent scales, label units clearly, show relevant time periods, and avoid truncated axes when they could exaggerate differences.

“I also provide context through targets, previous periods, or benchmarks where appropriate. Most importantly, I validate that the aggregation and denominator match the metric definition.”

Q37. How would you handle an ambiguous problem?

“I would convert the ambiguity into explicit questions and testable assumptions. I would identify the decision, users, scope, data sources, constraints, and expected output.

“If uncertainty remains, I would build a small prototype using representative data and review it early. That reduces the risk of investing heavily in the wrong solution.”

Q38. How do you explain a technical finding to a nontechnical stakeholder?

“I begin with the business implication, not the query or model. I would say what changed, why it matters, and what action may be appropriate.

“For example, instead of saying that a join produced unmatched keys, I might say that five percent of service records could not be assigned to a customer because the customer identifiers were missing or invalid, so customer-level performance is currently understated.

“I would then explain the technical cause if the stakeholder needs it.”

11. Questions he should ask the interviewer

He should ask two or three, not all of them.

Best questions

“What business decisions are the most important dashboards from this team expected to support?”

“What would success look like for the person in this role during the first three to six months?”

“How are KPI definitions and data ownership managed when different stakeholders use different definitions?”

“What are the primary data sources and reporting tools currently used by the Services BI team?”

“How is the role divided among requirements gathering, SQL and data preparation, Power BI development, and stakeholder support?”

“What are the most common data-quality or reporting challenges the team is currently trying to solve?”

“How does the BI team collaborate with the data science function?”

Particularly suitable question for this interviewer

“Your background appears to combine rigorous quantitative work with applied data science. In your experience, what analytical habits distinguish a strong BI professional on this team?”

This is respectful and job-related without sounding overly personal.

12. Answers to avoid
Avoid: “I want to switch because development is difficult.”

Use:

“I want to specialize in data, analytics, and decision-support work.”

Avoid: “I am an expert in Power BI.”

The resume does not substantiate deep production ownership. Use:

“I have a strong data and development foundation and growing hands-on Power BI capability.”

Avoid: “I created the dashboard, and users liked it.”

Use measurable evidence:

“It reduced manual reporting time, improved visibility, or enabled users to identify exceptions.”

Avoid: Jumping directly to charts

Always begin with:

“I would first clarify the business decision and KPI definition.”

Avoid: Inventing telecom-domain experience

Use:

“My present experience is in enterprise application and database development. Although I am still developing Services-domain knowledge, I understand how to break down an operational process, define its events and metrics, and learn a new domain systematically.”

13. Tonight’s preparation plan
Priority 1: Prepare one Power BI project deeply

He should be able to describe:

Business problem
Data source
Tables and grain
Star schema
Power Query transformations
Relationships
Five DAX measures
Visual choices
Validation process
Business insight
Performance considerations

If possible, adapt the Employee Management System into a workforce dashboard:

Employee headcount
Attendance rate
Department-level attendance
Monthly absenteeism trend
Leave utilization
Late attendance
Drill-through to employee records

Do not pretend it was deployed at work if it was only a practice dashboard.

Priority 2: Revise these SQL concepts
Joins
GROUP BY and HAVING
CTEs
Window functions
CASE
NULL handling
Date aggregation
Duplicate detection
Query optimization
Grain and one-to-many relationships
Priority 3: Prepare three STAR stories
Employee Management System and workflow automation
Data extraction, cleaning, or processing challenge
Cross-functional requirement converted into a technical solution
Priority 4: Know every resume line

He should be able to explain:

What he personally built
Which technologies he used
Data volume, if known
Challenges
Testing
Outcome
His exact contribution
How the 40% improvement was calculated
14. Strong closing statement

“Thank you for the discussion. This role interests me because it brings together business requirements, SQL, data modeling, Power BI, and stakeholder collaboration. My current experience has given me a strong foundation in databases, APIs, automation, and translating requirements into working solutions. I am now intentionally applying that foundation to business intelligence. I would bring technical discipline, transparency, attention to data quality, and a strong willingness to learn the Services domain.”

Final interview mindset

The winning message should be:

“I may be transitioning in job title, but I am not starting from zero. I already understand data systems, SQL, databases, integrations, requirements, validation, and business workflows. I can transfer those capabilities into BI, and I am honest about where I am still building depth.”

That positioning is far more credible than trying to appear like a senior Power BI specialist. It also fits an associate-level position requiring at least one year of experience, SQL, Power BI, business acumen, collaboration, problem-solving, and attention to data accuracy.